Example for Gateway with gRPC routing (#40260)
cilium-team/cilium: Documentation/network/servicemesh/gateway-api/grpc.rst

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

.. _gs_gateway_grpc:

*************
gRPC Example
*************

This example demonstrates how to set up a Gateway that terminates TLS traffic and
routes requests to a gRPC service (i.e. using HTTP/2). In order for this example to
work, ALPN support needs to be enabled with the Helm flag ``gatewayAPI.enableAlpn``
set to true. This enables clients to request HTTP/2 through the TLS negotiation.

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../examples/kubernetes/gateway/grpc-tls-termination.yaml
     :language: yaml

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Self-signed Certificate

>         For demonstration purposes we will use a TLS certificate signed by a made-up,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        This example uses a TLS certificate signed by a made-up,
```

Author: Note that this text is a copy of the text used by the HTTPS example. I couldn't reuse ../tls-cert.rst because it has multiple hostnames.

Fixed.

        `self-signed <https://cert-manager.io/docs/faq/terminology/#what-does-self-signed-mean-is-my-ca-self-signed>`_
        certificate authority (CA). One easy way to do this is with `mkcert <https://github.com/FiloSottile/mkcert>`_.

>         We want a certificate that will validate ``grpc-echo.cilium.rocks``, as these are the host names used in this example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        The certificate will validate ``grpc-echo.cilium.rocks``, as these are the host names used in this example.
```

Author: Fixed.

        .. code-block:: shell-session

            $ mkcert bookinfo.cilium.rocks hispter.cilium.rocks
            Created a new local CA 💥
            Note: the local CA is not installed in the system trust store.
            Run "mkcert -install" for certificates to be trusted automatically ⚠

            Created a new certificate valid for the following names 📜
             - "grpc-echo.cilium.rocks"

            The certificate is at "./grpc-echo.cilium.rocks.pem" and the key at "./grpc-echo.cilium.rocks-key.pem" ✅

            It will expire on 28 September 2027 🗓

        Create a Kubernetes secret with this demo key and certificate:

        .. code-block:: shell-session

            $ kubectl create secret tls grpc-certificate --key=grpc-echo.cilium.rocks-key.pem --cert=grpc-echo.cilium.rocks.pem

    .. group-tab:: cert-manager

>         Let us install cert-manager:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Install cert-manager:
```

Author: Fixed.

        .. code-block:: shell-session

            $ helm repo add jetstack https://charts.jetstack.io
            $ helm install cert-manager jetstack/cert-manager --version v1.16.2 \
                --namespace cert-manager \
                --set crds.enabled=true \
                --create-namespace \
                --set config.apiVersion="controller.config.cert-manager.io/v1alpha1" \
                --set config.kind="ControllerConfiguration" \
                --set config.enableGatewayAPI=true

        Now, create a CA Issuer:

        .. parsed-literal::

            $ kubectl apply -f \ |SCM_WEB|\/examples/kubernetes/servicemesh/ca-issuer.yaml

Deploy the Gateway and GRPCRoute
================================

This sets up a simple gRPC echo server and a Gateway to expose it.

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Self-signed Certificate

>         We already created the certificate Secret in the previous step, so
>         we can just create the resources:
> 
>         .. parsed-literal::
> 
>             $ kubectl apply -f \ |SCM_WEB|\/examples/kubernetes/gateway/grpc-tls-termination.yaml
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        .. parsed-literal::

            $ kubectl apply -f \ |SCM_WEB|\/examples/kubernetes/gateway/grpc-tls-termination.yaml

        The self-signed certificate Secrets from the previous step will be used by this Gateway.
```

Reviewer: ^ The goal here is to avoid the use of "we", and also to match the same flow as the other tab - hence why I suggested an alternate sentence after the common step rather than before.

Author: Fixed.

    .. group-tab:: cert-manager

        .. parsed-literal::

            $ kubectl apply -f \ |SCM_WEB|\/examples/kubernetes/gateway/grpc-tls-termination.yaml

        To tell cert-manager that this Gateway needs a certificate, annotate the

>         Gateway with the name of the CA issuer we previously created:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Gateway with the name of the CA issuer you previously created:
```

Author: Fixed.

        certificate.

        .. code-block:: shell-session

            $ kubectl get certificate,secret grpc-certificate
            NAME                                           READY   SECRET             AGE
            certificate.cert-manager.io/grpc-certificate   True    grpc-certificate   83s
            NAME                      TYPE                DATA   AGE
            secret/grpc-certificate   kubernetes.io/tls   3      78s

External IP address will be shown up in Gateway. Also, the host names should show
up in related HTTPRoutes.

.. code-block:: shell-session

    $ kubectl get gateway tls-gateway
    NAME          CLASS    ADDRESS         PROGRAMMED   AGE
    tls-gateway   cilium   10.104.247.23   True         29s

    $ kubectl get grpcroutes
    NAME         HOSTNAMES   AGE
    grpc-route               116s

Update ``/etc/hosts`` with the host names and IP address of the Gateway:

.. code-block:: shell-session

    $ sudo perl -ni -e 'print if !/\.cilium\.rocks$/d' /etc/hosts; sudo tee -a /etc/hosts \
      <<<"$(kubectl get gateway tls-gateway -o jsonpath='{.status.addresses[0].value}') grpc-echo.cilium.rocks"

Make gRPC Requests
===================

> We can use the `grpcurl <https://github.com/fullstorydev/grpcurl>`_ cli tool to verify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the `grpcurl <https://github.com/fullstorydev/grpcurl>`_ cli tool to verify
```

Author: Fixed.
